📖 Proposal : New Plugin to allow project distribution via helm charts (#3632)
kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder: designs/helm-chart-autogenerate-plugin.md

| Authors       | Creation Date | Status      | Extra |
|---------------|---------------|-------------|---|
| @name | date | Implementeble | - |

> # Auto-generate Helm Chart Plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Allow users package Operator with HelmCharts
```

I think our goal is to allow to distribute the Operator done with Kubebuilder via HelmCharts.
We might be able to achive the goal using the Kubebuilder Plugin ecosystem. See: https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/plugins

Reviewer 2: +1 for what @camilamacedo86 said, but I believe "Helm Charts" (separated by space) is the common way to write it.

===================

> The proposal is to add a new alpha command to auto-generate a helm chart for a given kustomize directory created by kubebuilder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal aims to introduce an optional mechanism that allows users to generate a Helm Chart from their Kubebuilder-scaffolded project. This will enable them to effectively package and distribute their solutions.
```

Here is more about the goal
How to achieve that will ihmo we need to add in the technical details section.

Author: let me try to understand, the  **Command** type is to add a new subcommand such as `kubebuilder generate-helm-chart`. And the **Plugin** type is to add a new internal plugin such as `kubebuilder init --plugins=helmchart/v1alpha`.
Is that what you mean? 

If so, I agree with the **Plugin** type. Users can get a default layout of helm chart from the [existing kustomize configurations](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/testdata/project-v4/config/default/kustomization.yaml) and [project configurations](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/testdata/project-v4/PROJECT).

As for synchronization with the kustomize directory, I think the main cost is **Adding/Deleting the CRDs**. However, we could leverage the kustomize and project configurations to generate a new helm chart once runs the command `kubebuilder init --plugins=helmchart/v1alpha`. Also, If there is a generated helm chart, the plugin will recognize it and   not affect the customizing part.

To make the above feature more clear, we can split it into two command `kubebuilder init` and `kubebuilder edit`.

Reviewer 2: I have a concern, which I believe touches this subject. 
 
When we add a new marker for a CRD, and run `make manifests`, it generates new changes to the CRD in `config/crds`. When we add RBAC markers, it changes the Roles in the `config/rbac`. I'm talking about CRDs and RBAC, but could really be anything that changes the kustomize bases, and consequently should also changes the chart.

So I think that ideally, when we run `make manifests`, these new changes should also be reflected in `deploy/helm-chart/crds` (for CRD changes) and `deploy/helm-chart/templates` (for RBAC). @dashanji @camilamacedo86 do you agree this is a goal of ours?

And if so, does either the plugin or command affect this flow? Would we still be able to change the Makefile to include this new behavior regardless of it being a plugin or a command?

Author: > So I think that ideally, when we run make manifests, these new changes should also be reflected in deploy/helm-chart/crds (for CRD changes) and deploy/helm-chart/templates (for RBAC). @dashanji @camilamacedo86 do you agree this is a goal of ours?

Agree.

> And if so, does either the plugin or command affect this flow? Would we still be able to change the Makefile to include this new behavior regardless of it being a plugin or a command?

I think users are supposed to control the flow. First, generate a new kustomize directory by running `make manifests`, then use the plugin or command to generate a helm chart from the new kustomize directory. In my opinionYour concern is about how helm charts are consistent with kustomize manifests. Can we use the idea of ​​patch or merge to solve

Reviewer 2: > I think users are supposed to control the flow. First, generate a new kustomize directory by running make manifests, then use the plugin or command to generate a helm chart from the new kustomize directory.

Ah ok, I was initially thinking of just running `make manifests`, not by running the plugin/command again. And that once we run the command/plugin once, it changes the Makefile to make sure `make manifests` also controls the helm chart.

I think this would be easier for users so that they don't forget to run an additional command to sync the chart, you know? I know I surely would forget many times :grin: 

How does that sound?

> In my opinion, your concern is about how helm charts are consistent with the customize manifests. Can we use the idea of ​​PATCH or MERGE (like kubectl patch) to solve such concern？

That wasn't my main concern here, but I agree that PATCH and MERGE will be good a good way to try to prevent undoing user customizations.

Reviewer: > Ah ok, I was initially thinking of just running make manifests

That is exactly what I am proposing. :-)  Here's the workflow:

- Execute kubebuilder init | edit.
- During this step, inform the plugin that you're looking to use the helm chart.
- This action will scaffold a specific target within the Makefile tailored for this scenario.
- Hence, when you run make manifests or generate commands, the CRDs will automatically sync with the helm chart.

## Example

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Via a new Optional Plugin**

By running `kubebuilder init --plugins=go/v4,helmchart/v1alpha` or `kubebuilder edit --plugins=helmchart/v1alpha` the scaffolds of HelmChart to package the Operator would be created in the project.

**Via command (Alternative Option)**
```

By running the following command, the plugin will generate a helm chart from the specific kustomize directory and output it to the directory specified by the `--output` flag.

```shell

> kubebuilder alpha generate-helm-chart --from=<path> --output=<path>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubebuilder alpha generate-helm-chart 
```
Would make sense the helmChart be generate in another place?
I think we can simplify right?
Just generate the helmChart under a specific dir like deploy in the project

```

## Open Questions [optional]

TBF

## Summary

> TBF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Helm Chart constructed by the project needs to mirror the default values used in Kubebuilder. Additionally, when new CRDs or Webhooks are generated, they should also be incorporated into the Helm Chart. Consequently, the new plugin should implement all the subCommands that are available to the [kustomize plugin](https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/kustomize-v2). Furthermore, we should also incorporate the edit feature, similar to the one present in the optional [Grafana plugin](https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/grafana-v1-alpha), to enable the option in a project that was created previously.

Therefore, the init subCommand should be responsible for creating the Helm Chart directory and scaffolding the base of the Helm Chart based on the default scaffold provided by kustomize. This implies that the same default values scaffolded to the manager and proxy, along with the options to enable metrics via Prometheus, cert-manager, and webhooks, which should be diseabled(commented) as they are in the [config/default/kustomization.yaml](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/f4744670e6fc8ed29f87161d39a8f2f3838c27f4/testdata/project-v4/config/default/kustomization.yaml#L21-L27) file by default.

Subsequently, if a user scaffolds webhooks, for example, we should uncomment the relevant sections. See the PRs https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/pull/3627 and https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/pull/3629 for reference on its implementation.

Lastly, when new API(s) (CRDs) are created, they should also be incorporated into the Helm Chart. Consequently, the Makefile targets make generate and make manifest should be adjusted when the proposed plugin is in use, to ensure the CRDs are copied and pasted into the respective directory of the Helm Chart.
```

Author: Make sense. 

There are several user cases:
Case 1: Users developed an Operator and would like to distribute the helm chart of the operator for the first time.
Case 2: Users already have a helm chart generated by the plugin, and they want to update the helm chart as the kustomize directory and files under it are updated. However, the update could be:
- CRDs (A new/old CRD is added/deleted/updated).
- Webhooks (A new/old Webhook is added/deleted/updated).
- RBAC roles.
- ...
Case 3: Users already have a helm chart generated by the plugin, and they update it for customizations (E.g, add new configurations in the `values.yaml`).  Once a new CRD is added, generate a new helm chart with the previous customizations.

Case 1 and Case 2 can be implemented in the common command `kubebuilder init --plugin=helm-chart/v1alpha`. The `init` command will overwrite all files under the directory `deplot/chart`.

I think the key point is how we address the Case 3. The possible approach in my mind is using the `kubebuilder edit --plugin` to reserve the previous files and then **MERGE** the previous files with the generated files.

## Motivation

> Currently, kubebuilder only supports the distribution of the operator by the kustomize. However, many well-known operators contains the distribution of helm charts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, Kubebuilder does not offer any utilities to facilitate the distribution of projects. One could clone the entire project and utilize the Makefile targets to apply the solution on clusters. Consequently, this proposal aims to introduce a method that allows Kubebuilder users to easily distribute their projects through Helm Charts, a strategy that many similar many well-known operators contains the distribution of helm charts:
```

- [mongodb](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/mongodb-helm-charts/community-operator
)
- [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/v1.6-docs/installation/helm/#1-add-the-jetstack-helm-repository)

> - [prometheus](https://bitnami.com/stack/prometheus-operator/helm)

Reviewer 2: another very popular example:
```suggestion
- [prometheus](https://bitnami.com/stack/prometheus-operator/helm)
- [aws-load-balancer-controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/tree/main/helm/aws-load-balancer-controller)
```

> The proposed command will auto-generate a helm chart from a kustomize directory created by kubebuilder with minimizing the manual effort. The generated helm chart will cover the frequently-used configurations.
> 
> Context:
> 
> - See the discussion [Is there a good solution/tool to generate a new helm chart from the manifests?](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/discussions/3074)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NOTE** For further context see the [discussion topic](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/discussions/3074) 
```

I think we can link the topic but we can write down here what is relevant or not

### Goals

> - Help developers to generate a helm chart from a kustomize directory.
> - Generate a helm chart without human interactions once the kustomize directory updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow Kubebuilder users distribute their projects using Helm easily
```

In my opinion, that is our goal. We cannot be in the business of converting any Kustomize configuration to Helm Charts like [helmify](https://github.com/arttor/helmify) does.

> - Reserve the ability to customize the helm chart by the developer.

Reviewer: In my opinion, that is one of the reasons why the solution cannot be implemented solely through commands.

> - Reserve the ability to customize the helm chart by the developer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Make the best effort to preserve any customizations made to the Helm Charts by the users
```
If we are unable to automatically update the Helm Charts when changes are made in the Operator, requiring users to manually perform these updates, the utility of this feature becomes significantly diminished. Therefore, preserving user customizations may not be feasible in some scenarios. For example, if you modify a CRD directly in the Kubebuilder scaffold instead of using the appropriate markers, your changes will be lost when you run make manifest generate. Similarly, modifications will be lost if made directly into the Helm Charts. The plugin should thus strive to ensure that the Operator and the Helm Chart used for its distribution are synchronized as closely as possible.

### Non-Goals

> - Generate the helm chart from a kustomize directory not created by kubebuilder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Converting any Kustomize configuration to Helm Charts like [helmify](https://github.com/arttor/helmify) does
- Support the deprecated plugins. This option should be supported from go/v4 and kustomize/v2 
```

> - Generate the fine-grained configurations.

Reviewer: What do you mean with this one?

Author: We don't provide a complete set of all configurations just as the fine-grained configurations like [Promethus operator configurations]( https://github.com/bitnami/charts/tree/main/bitnami/kube-prometheus/#prometheus-operator-parameters).

Reviewer: I think that depends in how we will generate the files 
So, as a goal I think we should reduce the scope as much as possible for an initial version

Author: Make sense.

## Proposal

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new optional plugin will create a new directory, deploy/helmchart, where the scaffolding of the project should be constructed as follows:

//TODO: We need a better definition 
// We must create a helmChart with the default Kubebuilder scaffold to add here

```shell
❯ tree deploy/helmchart
helmchart
    ├── Chart.yaml
    ├── crds
    │   ├── <CRDs YAML files generate under config/crds/>
    ├── templates
    │   ├── deployment.yaml 
    │   ├── _helpers.tpl
    │   ├── role_binding.yaml
    │   ├── role.yaml 
    │   ├── <all under config/rbac less the edit and view roles which are helpers for admins>
    └── values.yaml
```

```

We need to create a HelmChart based on the default scaffold provide by Kubebuilder
We can use for example the helmfy to see if that can help as out.
So that we can properly update and add the definitions here.

To reduce the user adaptation, the command

> leverage the existing kustomize default directory and create the similar layout of the helm chart from it. The generated `values.yaml` is as follows:

Reviewer: Question?
The values is to allow us edit the values right?
So, should we really add those options?

Reviewer 2: The values file present in a Chart definition is used as default when you pull it as dependency somewhere else. I think it's a good opportunity to set sane defaults for users.

That said, I'm leaning towards thinking we should only generate the values file during scaffolding and then never touch it again automatically (letting the user customize it at will, without `make generate` undoing these customizations).

If we do want to touch it after initial scaffolding, I think we would need some markers to express how these defaults should vary. It would also need to not change **additional** stuff authors add (eg, ConfigMaps if their controller mounts a config file).

Reviewer: The values has the manager values 
Those are not changed with make generate manifest

After the first scaffold of the helm chart what mainly would change with `make generate manifest` would be the RBAC and the CRDs, Those we will need to replace. 

But at the same way that we do not change the manager manifests we would not change those ones after the first scaffold.

Author: > So, should we really add those options?

I think the answer is yes, these options provide the following chances to adapt the deployment of operator to the kubernetes cluster.

- Deploy the operator on the specific node.
- Adjust the operator's resources limitations.
- Specify the debug version of the operator image.
- ...

Reviewer: @dashanji,

But the idea of helmChart is to distribute the Operator itself.
So, my concern here is we allow the helmChart not be sync with the Operator itself by default we can add that in the OpenQuestions.

Author: > But the idea of helmChart is to distribute the Operator itself.

Agree, but we can't have no options, as it will be the same as all-in-one YAML. I think the key issue is to find some common and useful options.

```yaml
# global configurations
nameOverride: ""

fullnameOverride: ""

crd:

>   create: true

Reviewer: This one for example should be scaffold as false when we run the init command with the plugin or the edit and no CRDs were created yet. See that we track all in the PROJECT file so we must to check in order to properly add false or true.

Then, when we run kubebuilder create api we should ensure that it has true if a resource was generated.

Reviewer 2: I've seen a couple of controllers offering the option not to install CRDs via the chart, but honestly never seen an use case for it being disabled. @dashanji have you ever come across the need to disable it?

If it really is uncommon, I would push for not exposing this field in the first place, and letting the small percentage of users that need this, add it manually.

For example, we don't conditionally install CRDs via the generated kustomize: they're always installed. I think it's a good idea to follow the same decisions that were taken for Kustomize here in Helm, so that users are not surprised with inconsistent behavior.

Reviewer: > I've seen a couple of controllers offering the option not to install CRDs via the chart, but honestly never seen an use case for it being disabled. @dashanji have you ever come across the need to disable it?

Then that is a too-specific edge case I think
But in the future if needed we can revisit.

Reviewer: >For example, we don't conditionally install CRDs via the generated kustomize: they're always installed

How they are installed already?
If you create the API/CRD in the Operator how it can exist on the cluster in a common scenario before it be installed?

Reviewer 2: > > For example, we don't conditionally install CRDs via the generated kustomize: they're always installed
> 
> How they are installed already? If you create the API/CRD in the Operator how it can exist on the cluster in a common scenario before it be installed?

I mean to say that there is no way to conditionally install the CRD via Kustomize, as an argument that there shouldn't be one for Helm either. I have never came across a scenario on which the CRD was installed prior to the controller being deployed.

Reviewer: If you did not run `make install` to install the CRDs when you deploy the Manager/Operator (which has the controllers) `make deploy` then the manager will fail in the initialization.

Reviewer 2: > If you did not run `make install` to install the CRDs when you deploy the Manager/Operator (which has the controllers) `make deploy` then the manager will fail in the initialization.

True, fair enough, that's not a good argument I gave. I still think we shouldn't add this `crd.create` in the values file, because it seems to be only there to facilitate an uncommon use-case for a Helm Chart.

Reviewer 2: So, same controller installed multiple times in the same cluster? Don't they conflict with each other, in the sense that they all reconcile the same resources? Just trying to understand. In our case, we only install each controller once per cluster, so I guess that's why we never came across this.

Author: > So, same controller installed multiple times in the same cluster? Don't they conflict with each other, in the sense that they all reconcile the same resources?

Yep, especially when we use cert-manager as a sub chart, the cert-manager component will exist under each namespace along with the operator. Also, there is a situation where you do not use make `undeploy/uninstall` to delete resources such as CRD and webhook. Instead, you directly use a command like `kubectl delete deployment xxx` to delete the controller.

Reviewer 2: Got it, I can see how this is useful for controllers that will be used as a dependency. 

We took a different approach, in which we just assume the CRD from another controller we require exists (and if it doesn't, it should be fixed elsewhere). For example, in controllers that depend on cert-manager, we just add our Issuers, Certificates, etc, but no CRD. The CRD should be provided by the cert-manager installation. This way we don't need to always define all CRDs we depend on, only the ones we provide in each specific controller.

But the bottom line is: should kubebuilder adopt this, given that there are many different ways to solve this particular problem? Since many charts provide this, I'd be ok with it being here as well and no longer have a strong opinion on this.

Reviewer: I think if we have cert-manager enable, then we should scaffold it as a dependency in helm-charts.

Reviewer: How to deal with CertManager and Prometheus?

^ I think we need add those in the OpenQuestions

## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/admin/authorization/rbac/
rbac:
  create: true
  serviceAccountName: ""

> ## Configure the manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Manager configuration referent to `config/manager/manager.yaml`
```

Reviewer: Also, I think in the whole helmChart we should add comments to make clear from where came each things so that users are able to either better keep it maintained and manually ajust/fix when required.

Author: Make sense.

> manager:

Reviewer: We need map and describe in the proposal from what came from where
For example, here we should have the values related to what we scaffold under `config/manager/manager.yaml` such as: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/testdata/project-v4/config/manager/manager.yaml

  ## The Security Context of the manager Pod.
  ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/#set-the-security-context-for-a-pod
  podSecurityContext:
  runAsNonRoot: true

  ## Configure the kubeRbacProxy container.
  kubeRbacProxy:
    image:
     registry: gcr.io
     repository: "kubebuilder/kube-rbac-proxy"
     tag: v0.13.0

>      pullPolicy: IfNotPresent

Reviewer: This one we need put the data that we have in : https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/testdata/project-v4/config/default/manager_auth_proxy_patch.yaml

  	env: []

    ## Configure extra options for liveness probe.
    ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-probes/#configure-probes
    livenessProbe:
      enabled: true
      httpGet:
        path: /healthz
        port: 8081
      initialDelaySeconds: 15
      periodSeconds: 20

    readinessProbe:
      enabled: true
      httpGet:
        path: /readyz
        port: 8081
      initialDelaySeconds: 5
      periodSeconds: 10

    ## Configure the resources.
    ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/ 
    resources:
      limits:
        cpu: 500m
        memory: 128Mi
      requests:
        cpu: 10m
        memory: 64Mi

     ## Configure the scheduling rules.
     ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/assign-pod-node/#affinity-and-anti-affinity
     affinity: {}

     ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/assign-pod-node/#nodeselector
     nodeSelector: {}

     ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/taint-and-toleration
     tolerations: {}

     ## Configure the rbac roles.

>      serviceAccountName: ""

Reviewer: We have not serviceAccount in the default scaffold right?
Why for helmChart do we need them?

>      serviceAccountName: ""

Reviewer: We need put the same value from: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/testdata/project-v4/config/manager/manager.yaml#L101

## Configure the webhook
webhook:
  enabled: true
  ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/
  service:
    type: ClusterIP
    ports:
    - port: 443
      protocol: TCP

>       targetPort: 9443

Reviewer: This one would be `config/default/manager_webhook_patch.yam` : https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/testdata/project-v4/config/default/manager_webhook_patch.yaml#L6-L23

metrics:
  enabled: true
  service:
    type: ClusterIP
    ports:
    - port: 8443
      protocol: TCP

## Configure the cert-manager
certmanager:
  enabled: true
  installCRDs: true
  ## Add the owner reference to the certificate.
  extraArgs:
  - --enable-certificate-owner-ref=true

prometheus:
  ## Enable the Prometheus Monitor
  enabled: false

## The domain name of Kubernetes cluster 
## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/
clusterDomain: cluster.local
```

### User Stories

- As a developer, I want to be able to generate a helm chart from a kustomize directory so that I can distribute the helm chart to my users. Also, I want the 
generation to be as simple as possible without the need to write any additional duplicate files.

- As a user, I want the helm chart can cover all potential configurations when I deploy it on the Kubernetes cluster.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- As a platform engineer, I want to be able to manage different versions and configurations of a controller/operator across multiple clusters and environments based on the same distribution artifact (Helm Chart), with versioning and dependency locking for supply chain security.
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

TBF

### Risks and Mitigations

> TBF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Difficulty in Maintaining the Solution**

Maintaining the solution may prove challenging in the long term, particularly if it does not gain adoption and, consequently, collaboration from the community. To mitigate this risk, the proposal aims to introduce an optional alpha plugin or implement it through an alpha command. This approach provides us with more flexibility to make changes, or, if necessary, deprecate it without definitively compromising support.

```

### Proof of Concept [optional]

Refer to the open source tool
[helmify](https://github.com/arttor/helmify).

## Drawbacks

> TBF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Generation of Deployable Helm Chart:**
   There might be challenges in generating a deployable Helm Chart without human intervention, similar to the current process for Kubebuilder projects.

```

## Alternatives

> TBF

Reviewer: Here I think we need disccuss the command option 
ALso, add the pros and cons of each one of them

Reviewer: Can you just add the command here ? Then that is fine

| Authors       | Creation Date | Status      | Extra |
|---------------|---------------|-------------|---|

> | @name | date | Implementeble | - |

Reviewer: Hi folks,

Many users are looking for this proposal: To aid in its implementation, it would be extremely helpful to have a sample project.

Specifically, we are looking for a project scaffolded with Kubebuilder from scratch, with default values scaffolded in a HelmChart, as the tool should be able to do when we run the init|edit command with the proposed Helm plugin.

If anyone already has a Kubebuilder project packaged with Helm, or if someone is willing to contribute by creating this proof of concept (POC) for us to link in the proposal, it would be greatly appreciated. :raised_hands: Please, feel free to add the link or links in a comment of this PR.

Thank you!

- Seamlessly integrate with Helm's ecosystem, including FluxCD, to efficiently manage the Operator.

However, Kubebuilder does not offer any utilities to facilitate the distribution of projects currently. One could clone the entire project and utilize the Makefile targets to apply the solution on clusters. Consequently, this proposal aims to introduce a method that allows Kubebuilder users to easily distribute their projects through Helm Charts, a strategy that many similar many well-known operators contains the distribution of helm charts:

- [mongodb](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/mongodb-helm-charts/community-operator
)
- [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/v1.6-docs/installation/helm/#1-add-the-jetstack-helm-repository)
- [prometheus](https://bitnami.com/stack/prometheus-operator/helm)
- [aws-load-balancer-controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/tree/main/helm/aws-load-balancer-controller)

**NOTE** For further context see the [discussion topic](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/discussions/3074) 

### Goals

- Allow Kubebuilder users distribute their projects using Helm easily.

> - Make the best effort to preserve any customizations made to the Helm Charts by the users.

Reviewer 2: I think skipping syncs in `values.yaml` also kind of implies in skipping at least part of syncs in the `templates/*.yaml` files, or use markers or some other mechanism so we clearly mark which parts kubebuilder can and can't change.

My point is that if the user has custom variables in `values.yaml`, it necessarily means they also changed something in `templates/` to get that value, optionally transform it and render in the resulting manifest.

Not sure if worth mentioning in the proposal, but just wanted to make sure we're on the same page here.

<details><summary>Example</summary>
<p>

The name of the image would probably be sourced from the Makefile/env, and inserted directly into a `templates/deployment.yaml`:

```yaml
kind: Deployment
# (...)
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      image: foo/bar:latest
``` 

Let's assume our values file doesn't provide a way for users to pass in env vars. The user would do something like this in the template:

```yaml
kind: Deployment
# (...)
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      image: foo/bar:latest
      containers:
      - name: not-important-for-the-example
        {{- if .Values.env }}
        env:
          {{- $k, $v := range .Values.env }}
          - name: {{ $k }}
            value: {{ $v }}
          {{- end }}
        {{- end }}
``` 

When syncing the template again, we can't remove the user customization (or this gets pretty useless pretty quickly -- if I have to write my own tooling to make any kind of customization to run on top of kubebuilder, why don't I just write all of this tooling without a Helm Chart plugin in the first place?).

On the other hand, we must make sure the image is up-to-date.

What I mentioned about markers was something like (just an example, not an actual suggestion for how the marker should be named, placed, etc):
```yaml
kind: Deployment
# (...)
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      {{/* +kubebuilder:scaffolding:image */}}
      image: foo/bar:latest
      containers:
      - name: not-important-for-the-example
        {{- if .Values.env }}
        env:
          {{- $k, $v := range .Values.env }}
          - name: {{ $k }}
            value: {{ $v }}
          {{- end }}
        {{- end }}
```
</p>
</details>

> - Make the best effort to preserve any customizations made to the Helm Charts by the users.

Reviewer: We are proposing some details of the implementation it might be more clear now.

> - Make the best effort to preserve any customizations made to the Helm Charts by the users.

Reviewer: I am closing so we can do a new last round .. the please feel free to raise any concern/suggestion

### Non-Goals

- Converting any Kustomize configuration to Helm Charts like [helmify](https://github.com/arttor/helmify) does.
- Support the deprecated plugins. This option should be supported from go/v4 and kustomize/v2

> - Introduce support for Helm in addition to Kustomize, or replace Kustomize with Helm entirely, similar to the approach taken by Operator-SDK, thereby allowing users to utilize Helm Charts to build their Operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Attend standard practices that deviate from HelmCharts layout, definition, or conventions to workaround its limitations
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Attend standard practices that deviate from HelmCharts layout, definition, or conventions to workaround its limitations
```

We need to add more one here.
Otherwise, we will end up in the business to start to discuss how company/team A does and how company/team B does when we cannot attend to everybody. So, we need to stick with Helm definitions and official docs to generate the HelmChart

Author: Agree.

## Proposal

The new optional plugin will create a new directory, `deploy/helm-chart`, where the scaffolding of the project should be constructed as follows:
//TODO: We need a better definition 
// We must create a Helm Chart with the default Kubebuilder scaffold to add here
```shell
❯ tree deploy/helm-chart
helm-chart
    ├── Chart.yaml
    ├── crds

>     │   ├── <CRDs YAML files generate under config/crds/>

Reviewer 3: I think some concern needs to be given to how this is done. In our experience converting our kubebuilder projects to helm charts the CRD folder in helm was not what we wanted as it precluded us from every upgrading the CRD again with future changes. We ended up treating the CRD as another file in templates to facilitate upgrades. this is an approach used by several operators today however with the obvious drawback of "if you uninstall the operator you uninstall the crds"

Reviewer: >in helm was not what we wanted as it precluded us from every upgrading the CRD

What do you mean with this one?
Could you please give an example?

Reviewer 3: Once helm installs a CRD from the `crd/` folder it will skip it if it detects that the CRD is already installed. 

This meant we were unable to change the crd schema after initial installation. We just put the CRD definition in the `templates/` folder to facilitate actual updates

Reviewer: Hi @Jay-Madden 

It seems a good point. it seems a good approach but that means that the lifecycle of the CRD is tied to the Helm release. This could potentially lead to issues if the Helm chart is deleted or if different releases try to manage the same CRD. Also, another approaches seems that are:

- Versioning CRDs: When making significant changes to a CRD schema, consider versioning the CRD. This allows you to deploy a new version of the CRD without affecting existing resources that use the old schema.
- Helm Hooks: You could use Helm hooks to manage the lifecycle of CRDs. For example, a pre-upgrade hook could apply changes to a CRD before the rest of the Helm chart is processed.

So, I think we need an Open Question in the proposal 
and we need POC and investigate the pros and cons of each case scenario
as check how people has been doing that.

Reviewer 4: As a newer user of kubebuilder, I am very excited about this proposal! 

An additional approach for CRDs could be a separate helm chart for crds, alongside the main chart for deploying an operator. The [AWS Karpenter Operator](https://github.com/aws/karpenter/tree/main/charts/karpenter-crd) uses this approach and it has allowed full control of both CRD versions and operator version in automated production environments using helm technologies without some of the drawbacks like deleting crds when operator chart is deleted. 

This approach also plays nicely with tools like terraform and ArgoCD alike.

Reviewer 2: > This approach also plays nicely with tools like terraform and ArgoCD alike.

Anecdotally, we use ArgoCD and so far separate charts for CRDs have been more annoying than beneficial, in the sense we need extra toil to keep things in-sync and never had any use for the benefits. That said, I can see how that's not the case depending on things are set-up.

Charts that provide the CRDs as part of their templates, as @Jay-Madden suggested have been less of a headache and preferred in our team.

Reviewer: Helm, the package manager for Kubernetes, typically uses the crd/ directory as the default location for Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs). In my opinion, if we're developing a plugin to distribute Operators via Helm, it should adapt to the Helm layout.

However, it's important to recognize that preferences vary across teams and companies; we can't satisfy everyone. Our best approach is to adhere to Helm's standards and guidelines.

From my experience, and as observed in many Helm Charts distributing Operators (such as CertManager), it's crucial to ensure that CRDs are applied before installing or upgrading a Helm Chart. This practice is generally achievable with any solution. However, if individuals choose to deviate from Helm's defined practices, it may be beyond our scope to accommodate those variations.

Reviewer 3: > However, it's important to recognize that preferences vary across teams and companies; we can't satisfy everyone. Our best approach is to adhere to Helm's standard layout and guidelines.

Totally agree you cant please everyone, however an option for either the `crd/` folder or just put them in `templates/` seems easy enough low friction implementation wise to offer it as an option that i believe that will account for 90%+ of user needs.

Reviewer 2: I get the best practices push, and I also get the point @Jay-Madden makes that this seems simple to implement and would cover a very substantial amount of use-cases, where the best practices wouldn't. A nice-to-have feat.

I think that this can be done as a further improvement if/when folks request it as a feature, and there is no need to support this on a first version. Let's get this out of the paper first.

>  ^ PS.: IMO, we need to add it in the OpenQuestion, and something like the above would be the answer. The plugin will package the Operator following the Helm's layout definition - we cannot attend to everybody's deviations and personal preferences.

Agreed.

Reviewer 5: Chiming in with my two cents on this crucial question.

The helm project essentially punted on CRD handling. Method 1 (linked above) is essentially that helm will create the CRDs on the initial install... _and never touch them again_.  Last I checked, it will silently ignore CRDs in upgraded chart versions, even if they differ from what is installed. This is potentially surprising and unexpected behavior, and I think it would be wise for the kubebuilder project to avoid supporting or endorsing it.

I believe the basis for this decision by the helm project is that upgrading CRDs is a potentially destructive operation, so the maintainers opted for a safe implementation to avoid `helm` itself being blamed for a CRD update the broke a cluster. The design rather puts the onus on cluster administrators to upgrade the CRDs fully out-of-band of `helm`.

I would suggest supporting one or both of the following options:
1. As was suggested by @Jay-Madden, the better choice is to put the CRDs into the `templates/` directory. This will cause helm to treat the CRDs like any other object and it will upgrade them as expected. The _one_ downside to this approach is that it means that you cannot put both a CRD and a CR of that type in the same chart. Helm is unable to create the CRD, wait for it to be registered, and then proceed with the CR creation in a single release install/upgrade. This leads me to option 2.
2. Scaffold separate charts for the APIs.

Option 2 is actually its own can of worms, but one that likely needs to be opened sooner rather than later. If a CRD specified a conversion webhook, then the "API chart" would actually need to contain the CRDs and the webhook service/workload (and in many cases, it would also make sense to include validating/mutating webhooks in an "API chart"). This structure would then have implications on the scaffolding of the actual go project itself because it would need to scaffold separate main modules and image builds for the webhooks and controllers

Reviewer: So, based on the discussion here we need to stick with  @Jay-Madden suggestion
Could we ensure that it is defined in this proposal @dashanji ?

  create: true
  serviceAccountName: "controller-manager"

## Manager configuration referent to `config/manager/manager.yaml`
manager:
  ## The Security Context of the manager Pod.
  ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/security-context/#set-the-security-context-for-a-pod
  podSecurityContext:
    runAsNonRoot: true

  ## Configure the kubeRbacProxy container.
  kubeRbacProxy:
    image:
     registry: gcr.io
     repository: "kubebuilder/kube-rbac-proxy"
     tag: v0.13.0
     pullPolicy: IfNotPresent

  ## Configure the resources.
  ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/ 
  resources:
    limits:
      cpu: 500m
      memory: 128Mi
    requests:
      cpu: 5m
      memory: 64Mi

  ## Configure the controller container.
  controller:
    image:
      registry: docker.io
      repository: ""
      tag: latest
      pullPolicy: IfNotPresent

     ## The environment variables of the controller container.
     ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/define-environment-variable-container/

>   	env: []

Reviewer: Do we have our default Kubebuilder Operator layout or any plugin?
If not, then I think we need to remove it.
If yes, we need to add a comment here to justify why/when we need/use this one.

Or goal is just package the Operator in HelmChart
Any extra thing or customizations that might be done on top shows out of our scope.

Reviewer 2: > Do we have our default Kubebuilder Operator layout or any plugin?

You mean that here we should only take inputs we already have in kustomize, for example? Inputs that kubebuilder currently already knows how to work with.

I think that makes sense, just clarifying.

    ## Configure extra options for liveness probe.
    ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-probes/#configure-probes
    livenessProbe:
      enabled: true
      httpGet:
        path: /healthz
        port: 8081
      initialDelaySeconds: 15
      periodSeconds: 20

    readinessProbe:
      enabled: true
      httpGet:
        path: /readyz
        port: 8081
      initialDelaySeconds: 5
      periodSeconds: 10

    ## Configure the resources.
    ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/ 
    resources:
      limits:
        cpu: 500m
        memory: 128Mi
      requests:
        cpu: 10m
        memory: 64Mi

     ## Configure the scheduling rules.
     ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/assign-pod-node/#affinity-and-anti-affinity
     affinity: {}

     ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/assign-pod-node/#nodeselector
     nodeSelector: {}

     ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/taint-and-toleration

>      tolerations: {}

Reviewer: Same here. The values must be exactly only what we have in the default scaffold
We need to stick with each otherwise will be very hard we maintain and make it work

| Authors       | Creation Date | Status      | Extra |
|---------------|---------------|-------------|---|
| @dashanji,@camilamacedo86,@LCaparelli... | Sep, 2023 | Implementeble | - |

> # Allow users package Operator with Helm Charts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Plugin to project distribution via helm charts
```

This proposal aims to introduce an optional mechanism that allows users to generate a Helm Chart from their Kubebuilder-scaffolded project. This will enable them to effectively package and distribute their solutions.

> To achieve this goal, we can introduce a Helm Chart plugin (i.e. helm-chart/v1alpha), which will provide the scaffolds. Alternatively, we could implement a command to generate the Helm Chart from a provided Kubebuilder project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve this goal, we are proposing a new native Kubebuilder [plugin](https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/plugins) (i.e., helm-chart/v1alpha) which will provide the necessary scaffolds. The plugin will function similarly to the existing [Grafana Plugin](https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/grafana-v1-alpha), generating or regenerating HelmChart files using the init and edit sub-commands (i.e., `kubebuilder init|edit --plugins helm-chart/v1alpha`). An alternative solution could be to implement an alpha command, similar to the [helper provided to upgrade projects](https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/rescaffold).
```

## Example

> **Via a new Optional Plugin**
> 
> There are several use cases for this plugin
> as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**To enable the helm-chart generation when a project is initialized**

> kubebuilder init --plugins=`go/v4,helm-chart/v1-alpha`

**To enable the helm-chart generation after the project be scaffolded OR to update the helm-chart files**

> kubebuilder edit --plugins=`go/v4,helm-chart/v1-alpha`
```

#### Case 1: Initial Helm chart distribution

> For users who have developed an Operator and wish to distribute it via a Helm chart for the first time:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For users who have developed an Kubebuilder Project and wish to distribute it via a Helm chart for the first time:
```

> By running `kubebuilder init|edit --plugins=helm-chart/v1alpha`, the scaffolds of Helm Chart to package the Operator would be created in the project as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By running `kubebuilder init|edit --plugins=helm-chart/v1alpha`, the scaffolds of Helm Chart to package the Project would be created in the project as follows:
```

Reviewer: Not all projects build with Kubebuilder might be "Operators"
So, we try to avoid the usage of term

Author: Make sense.

```shell
$ tree
.
..
├── PROJECT
...
├── deploy
│   └── helm-chart // The helm chart with all values will be scaffold under a directory of the project
...
```

The initial setup will be straightforward, creating the Helm chart structure and populating it with the default values as determined by the project's configuration.

#### Case 2: Update the Helm chart with manifests changes

For users who want to update an existing Helm chart to reflect changes in the kustomize directory, such as CRDs, Webhooks, or RBAC roles:

> The plugin will add specific targets within the Makefile that are tailored for Helm chart scenarios. When you run `make manifests` or `make generate` commands, CRDs, RBAC roles and webhooks will be automatically synchronized with the Helm chart.

Reviewer: I think we need to generate the manifests when we run the plugin
all code regards this feature will be implemented the plugin so we can assume that only the helm-chart new plugin knows how to transform kubebuilder project files to helm-chart values

Author: Agree, in this way, users only need to care about how to use this helm-chart plugin, and the more fine-grained control can be optimized according to needs later.

| Authors       | Creation Date | Status      | Extra |
|---------------|---------------|-------------|---|
| @dashanji,@camilamacedo86,@LCaparelli... | Sep, 2023 | Implementeble | - |

# New Plugin to allow project distribution via helm charts

This proposal aims to introduce an optional mechanism that allows users to generate a Helm Chart from their Kubebuilder-scaffolded project. This will enable them to effectively package and distribute their solutions.

> To achieve this goal, we are proposing a new native Kubebuilder [plugin](https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/plugins) (i.e., helm-chart/v1alpha) which will provide the necessary scaffolds. The plugin will function similarly to the existing [Grafana Plugin](https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/grafana-v1-alpha), generating or regenerating HelmChart files using the init and edit sub-commands (i.e., `kubebuilder init|edit --plugins helm-chart/v1alpha`). An alternative solution could be to implement an alpha command, similar to the [helper provided to upgrade projects](https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/rescaffold).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve this goal, we are proposing a new native Kubebuilder [plugin](https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/plugins) (i.e., helm-chart/v1-alpha) which will provide the necessary scaffolds. The plugin will function similarly to the existing [Grafana Plugin](https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/grafana-v1-alpha), generating or regenerating HelmChart files using the init and edit sub-commands (i.e., `kubebuilder init|edit --plugins helm-chart/v1-alpha`). An alternative solution could be to implement an alpha command, similar to the [helper provided to upgrade projects](https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/rescaffold).
```
Nit ^

## Example

> **To enable the helm-chart generation when a project is initialized**
> 
> > kubebuilder init --plugins=`go/v4,helm-chart/v1-alpha`
> 
> **To enable the helm-chart generation after the project be scaffolded OR to update the helm-chart files**
> 
> > kubebuilder edit --plugins=`go/v4,helm-chart/v1-alpha`
> 
> #### Case 1: Initial Helm chart distribution
> 
> For users who have developed an Kubebuilder Project and wish to distribute it via a Helm chart for the first time:
> 
> By running `kubebuilder init|edit --plugins=helm-chart/v1alpha`, the scaffolds of Helm Chart to package the Project would be created in the project as follows:
> 
> ```shell
> $ tree
> .
> ..
> ├── PROJECT
> ...
> ├── deploy
> │   └── helm-chart // The helm chart with all values will be scaffold under a directory of the project
> ...
> ```
> 
> The initial setup will be straightforward, creating the Helm chart structure and populating it with the default values as determined by the project's configuration.
> 
> #### Case 2: Update the Helm chart with manifests changes
> 
> For users who want to update an existing Helm chart to reflect changes in the kustomize directory, such as CRDs, Webhooks, or RBAC roles:
> 
> The plugin will automates this process. When you run the plugin, it will generate the necessary manifests and synchronize them with the Helm chart. This ensures that all changes in your kubebuilder project files, such as CRDs, RBAC roles, and webhooks, are accurately reflected in the Helm chart.
> 
> #### Case 3: Updating the Helm Chart with Customizations
> 
> For users who have customized their Helm chart (e.g., added new configurations in `values.yaml`) and want to update it while preserving these customizations:
> 
> Just like the other plugins in Kubebuilder, the Helm Chart plugin will not re-write the `values.yaml` after the initial generation. This means that any customizations made by the user will be preserved.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
**To enable the helm-chart generation when a project is initialized**

> kubebuilder init --plugins=`go/v4,helm-chart/v1-alpha`

**To enable the helm-chart generation after the project be scaffolded OR to update the helm-chart files**

> kubebuilder edit --plugins=`go/v4,helm-chart/v1-alpha`

The HelmChart should be scaffold under the `deploy/` directory:
```shell
├── PROJECT
...
├── deploy
│   └── {{ projectName }}-chart
...
```
````

I think we can make it less verbose and simplify it as described above

## Open Questions [optional]

> - How to effectively manage the lifecycle of CRDs within the generated Helm chart to support upgrades and changes to CRDs while minimizing potential impacts on existing resources and user deployment processes?
> - How to deal with CertManager and Prometheus? Should we add them as dependencies to the Helm Chart?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Open Questions

- How to manage and scaffold the CRDs for the HelmChart?

According to [Helm Best Practices for Custom Resource Definitions](https://helm.sh/docs/chart_best_practices/custom_resource_definitions/#method-1-let-helm-do-it-for-you), 
there are two main methods for handling CRDs:

- **Method 1:Let Helm Do It For You:**  Place CRDs in the `crds/` directory. Helm installs these CRDs during the initial 
install but does not manage upgrades or deletions.
- **Method 2:Separate Charts:**  Place the CRD definition in one chart 
and the resources using the CRD in another chart. 
This method requires separate installations for each chart.

**Raised Considerations and Concerns**
- **Use Helm crd directory** The upgraded chart versions will silently ignore CRDs even if they differ from the installed versions. This could lead to surprising and unexpected behavior.
However, it is how [cert-manager][]
- **Templates Folder**: Moving CRDs to the `templates` folder facilitates upgrades but uninstalls CRDs when the operator is uninstalled.
- **Separate Helm Chart for CRDs:** This approach allows control over both CRD and operator versions without deleting CRDs when the operator chart is deleted.
- **When Webhooks are used:** If a CRD specifies, for example, a conversion webhook, the "API chart" needs to contain the CRDs and the webhook `service/workload`. 
It would also make sense to include `validating/mutating` webhooks, requiring the scaffolding of separate main modules and image builds for 
webhooks and controllers which does not shows to be compatible with Kubebuilder Golang scaffold.

**Proposed Solution**

Follow the same approach adopted by [Cert-Manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/helm/).
Add the CRDs under the `template` directory and have a spec in the `values.yaml`
which will define if the CRDs should or not be applied

```shell
helm install|upgrade \
  myrelease \
  --namespace my-namespace \
  --set `crds.enabled=true`
```

Additionally, we might want to consider in the future also
scaffold separate charts for the APIs and support both.
An example of this approach provided as feedback
was [karpenter-provider-aws](https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/tree/main/charts).

- How to manage dependencies such as Cert-Manager and Prometheus?

Helm charts allow maintainers to define dependencies via `requirements.yaml`.

However, we can convey that in the initial version of this plugin, we do not need to consider any dependencies. 
As it stands today, consumers of the solutions built with Kubebuilder 
are responsible for installing their dependencies prior 
to installing the project built with Kubebuilder.

For example:
- If the project is using cert-manager, or
- If managing metrics is required, ensure that the cluster has Prometheus installed and with the required permissions beforehand.

It seems out of the scope of the project itself to manage these dependencies.

```

Reviewer: @dashanji  we should track our discussion and conveys so far.

> 

Reviewer: @dashanji @LCaparelli @Caiofralmeida, @jgillich, @jrxs-cg, @mhkarimi1383, @Jay-Madden, @maciaszczykm, @hprotzek, @octaviansima, @Cubixmeister, @isac322

Folks, 

I could generated a HelmChart using https://github.com/arttor/helmify.
So, I need your help to understand:
- Why kubebuilder maintainers would need to maintain a solution to package the its project in HelmChart when https://github.com/arttor/helmify is available already? Why not suggest it used instead?
What our plugin should do that is not done within? What value we bring for the community by doing this implementation instead of suggest its usage? What are the current problems faced with helmify that we would like to address here? Thank you for your help and collab.

Subsequently, if a user decides to scaffold webhooks, we should uncomment the relevant sections. Please refer to PRs https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/pull/3627 and https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/pull/3629 for examples of this implementation.

Lastly, when new API(s) (CRDs) are introduced, they must be added to the Helm Chart as well. As a result, the Makefile targets `make generate` and `make manifest` should be modified when the proposed plugin is in use to ensure that CRDs are accurately copied and pasted into the Helm Chart's respective directory.

To allow users to customize their Helm Charts, we should avoid overwriting files within the Helm Chart, with the exception of CRDs/webhooks, as changes made to these must be mirrored in the Helm Chart. However, what is scaffolded by the init/edit should remain primarily unchanged. We would only uncomment the options as described above.

## Motivation

Kubebuilder users currently face the challenges of lacking an officially supported distribution mechanism for Helm Chart. They seek to:

> - Harness the power of Helm Chart as a package manager for the Project, enabling seamless adaptation to diverse deployment environments.
> - Take advantage of Helm's dependency management capabilities to simplify the installation process of Project dependencies, such as cert-manager.
> - Seamlessly integrate with Helm's ecosystem, including FluxCD, to efficiently manage the Project.
> 
> However, Kubebuilder does not offer any utilities to facilitate the distribution of projects currently. One could clone the entire project and utilize the Makefile targets to apply the solution on clusters. Consequently, this proposal aims to introduce a method that allows Kubebuilder users to easily distribute their projects through Helm Charts, a strategy that many similar many well-known projects contains the distribution of helm charts:
> 
> - [mongodb](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/mongodb-helm-charts/community-operator
> )
> - [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/v1.6-docs/installation/helm/#1-add-the-jetstack-helm-repository)
> - [prometheus](https://bitnami.com/stack/prometheus-operator/helm)
> - [aws-load-balancer-controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/tree/main/helm/aws-load-balancer-controller)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Motivation

Currently, projects scaffolded with Kubebuilder can be distributed via YAML. Users can run
`make build-installer IMG=<some-registry>/<project-name>:tag`, which will generate `dist/install.yaml`.
Therefore, its consumers can install the solution by applying this YAML file, such as:
`kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/<org>/<project-name>/<tag or branch>/dist/install.yaml`.

However, many adopt solutions require the Helm Chart format, such as FluxCD. Therefore,
maintainers are looking to also provide their solutions via Helm Chart. Users currently face the challenges of lacking
an officially supported distribution mechanism for Helm Charts. They seek to:

- Harness the power of Helm Chart as a package manager for the project, enabling seamless adaptation to diverse deployment environments.
- Take advantage of Helm's dependency management capabilities to simplify the installation process of project dependencies, such as cert-manager.
- Seamlessly integrate with Helm's ecosystem, including FluxCD, to efficiently manage the project.

Consequently, this proposal aims to introduce a method that allows Kubebuilder users to easily distribute their projects through Helm Charts, a strategy that many well-known projects have adopted:

- [mongodb](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/mongodb-helm-charts/community-operator)
- [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/v1.6-docs/installation/helm/#1-add-the-jetstack-helm-repository)
- [prometheus](https://bitnami.com/stack/prometheus-operator/helm)
- [aws-load-balancer-controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/tree/main/helm/aws-load-balancer-controller)
```

> Kubebuilder users currently face the challenges of lacking an officially supported distribution mechanism for Helm Chart. They seek to:
> 
> - Harness the power of Helm Chart as a package manager for the Project, enabling seamless adaptation to diverse deployment environments.
> - Take advantage of Helm's dependency management capabilities to simplify the installation process of Project dependencies, such as cert-manager.
> - Seamlessly integrate with Helm's ecosystem, including FluxCD, to efficiently manage the Project.
> 
> However, Kubebuilder does not offer any utilities to facilitate the distribution of projects currently. One could clone the entire project and utilize the Makefile targets to apply the solution on clusters. Consequently, this proposal aims to introduce a method that allows Kubebuilder users to easily distribute their projects through Helm Charts, a strategy that many similar many well-known projects contains the distribution of helm charts:
> 
> - [mongodb](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/mongodb-helm-charts/community-operator
> )
> - [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/v1.6-docs/installation/helm/#1-add-the-jetstack-helm-repository)
> - [prometheus](https://bitnami.com/stack/prometheus-operator/helm)
> - [aws-load-balancer-controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/tree/main/helm/aws-load-balancer-controller)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Motivation

Currently, projects scaffolded with Kubebuilder can be distributed via YAML. Users can run
`make build-installer IMG=<some-registry>/<project-name>:tag`, which will generate `dist/install.yaml`.
Therefore, its consumers can install the solution by applying this YAML file, such as:
`kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/<org>/<project-name>/<tag or branch>/dist/install.yaml`.

However, many adopt solutions require the Helm Chart format, such as FluxCD. Therefore,
maintainers are looking to also provide their solutions via Helm Chart. Users currently face the challenges of lacking
an officially supported distribution mechanism for Helm Charts. They seek to:

- Harness the power of Helm Chart as a package manager for the project, enabling seamless adaptation to diverse deployment environments.
- Take advantage of Helm's dependency management capabilities to simplify the installation process of project dependencies, such as cert-manager.
- Seamlessly integrate with Helm's ecosystem, including FluxCD, to efficiently manage the project.

Consequently, this proposal aims to introduce a method that allows Kubebuilder users to easily distribute their projects through Helm Charts, a strategy that many well-known projects have adopted:

- [mongodb](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/mongodb-helm-charts/community-operator)
- [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/v1.6-docs/installation/helm/#1-add-the-jetstack-helm-repository)
- [prometheus](https://bitnami.com/stack/prometheus-operator/helm)
- [aws-load-balancer-controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/tree/main/helm/aws-load-balancer-controller)
```

**NOTE** For further context see the [discussion topic](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/discussions/3074)

### Goals

- Allow Kubebuilder users distribute their projects using Helm easily.
- Make the best effort to preserve any customizations made to the Helm Charts by the users, which means we will skip syncs in the `values.ymal`.
- Stick with Helm layout definitions and externalize into the relevant values-only options to distribute the default scaffold done by Kubebuilder. We should follow https://helm.sh/docs/chart_best_practices.

### Non-Goals

> - Converting any Kustomize configuration to Helm Charts like [helmify](https://github.com/arttor/helmify) does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

After think better I think we can remove this one.

- Support the deprecated plugins. This option should be supported from go/v4 and kustomize/v2
- Introduce support for Helm in addition to Kustomize, or replace Kustomize with Helm entirely, similar to the approach taken by Operator-SDK, thereby allowing users to utilize Helm Charts to build their Project.
- Attend standard practices that deviate from Helm Chart layout, definition, or conventions to workaround its limitations.

> - Provide values and options to allow users to perform customizations on the Helm Chart of features that are not used by default in the Project layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think we can remove it. Above we are saying that we will try to update the files. So, it does not seems to make sense

## Proposal

> The new optional plugin will create a new directory, `deploy/helm-chart`, where the scaffolding of the project should be constructed as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new optional plugin will create a new directory, `deploy/{{ .ProjectName }}-chart`, where the scaffolding of the project should be constructed as follows:
```

> //TODO: We need a better definition 
> // We must create a Helm Chart with the default Kubebuilder scaffold to add here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```shell
❯ tree deploy/helm-chart

> helm-chart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
projectName-chart
```

    livenessProbe:
      enabled: true
      httpGet:
        path: /healthz
        port: 8081
      initialDelaySeconds: 15
      periodSeconds: 20

    readinessProbe:
      enabled: true
      httpGet:
        path: /readyz
        port: 8081
      initialDelaySeconds: 5
      periodSeconds: 10

    ## Configure the resources.
    ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/ 
    resources:
      limits:
        cpu: 500m
        memory: 128Mi
      requests:
        cpu: 10m
        memory: 64Mi

     ## Configure the rbac roles.
     serviceAccountName: ""

## Webhook configuration under the `config/webhook` directory
webhook:
  ## Whether the `resources` field contains `webhook` in the `config/default/kustomization.yaml` file
  enabled: true
  ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/
  service:
    ports:
    - name: webhook-server
      protocol: TCP
      containerPort: 9443

metrics:
  enabled: true
  service:
    type: ClusterIP
    ports:
    - port: 8443
      protocol: TCP

> ## Configure the cert-manager dependency.
> certmanager:
>   enabled: true
>   installCRDs: true
>   ## Add the owner reference to the certificate.
>   extraArgs:
>   - --enable-certificate-owner-ref=true
> 
> ## Prometheus configuration under the `config/prometheus` directory
> prometheus:
>   ## Whether the `resources` field contains `prometheus` in the `config/default/kustomization.yaml` file
>   enabled: false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We cannot manage the dependencies.
We do not know where those will be installed.
For example, if a solution is installed in OCP it has Prometheus already.

generation to be as simple as possible without the need to write any additional duplicate files.

- As a user, I want the helm chart can cover all potential configurations when I deploy it on the Kubernetes cluster.

- As a platform engineer, I want to be able to manage different versions and configurations of a project across multiple clusters and environments based on the same distribution artifact (Helm Chart), with versioning and dependency locking for supply chain security.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

TBF

### Risks and Mitigations

**Difficulty in Maintaining the Solution**

Maintaining the solution may prove challenging in the long term, particularly if it does not gain community adoption and, consequently, collaboration. To mitigate this risk, the proposal aims to introduce an optional alpha plugin or to implement it through an alpha command. This approach provides us with greater flexibility to make adjustments or, if necessary, to deprecate the feature without definitively compromising support.

> Additionally, it is crucial to cover the solution with end-to-end tests to ensure that, despite any changes, the Helm Chart remains deployable and continues to function well, as is the practice with our other plugins and solutions.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
It should be part of the details to implement

### Proof of Concept [optional]

Refer to the open source tool
[helmify](https://github.com/arttor/helmify).

## Drawbacks

> **Generation of Deployable Helm Chart:**
> 
> There might be challenges in generating a deployable Helm Chart without human intervention, similar to the current process for Kubebuilder projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

**Inability to Handle Complex Kubebuilder Scenarios**

The proposed plugin may struggle to appropriately handle complex scenarios commonly encountered in Kubebuilder projects, such as intricate webhook configurations. Kubebuilder’s scaffolded projects can have sophisticated webhook setups, and translating these accurately into Helm Charts may prove challenging.
This could result in Helm Charts that are not fully reflective of the original project’s functionality or configurations.

**Incomplete Generation of Valid and Deployable Helm Charts**

The proposed solution may not be capable of generating a fully valid and deployable Helm Chart for all use cases 
supported by Kubebuilder. Given the diversity and complexity of potential configurations within Kubebuilder projects, there is a risk that the generated Helm Charts may require significant manual intervention to be functional. This drawback undermines the goal of simplifying distribution via Helm Charts and could lead to frustration for users who expect a seamless and automated process.
```

## Alternatives

**Via a new command (Alternative Option)**
By running the following command, the plugin will generate a helm chart from the specific kustomize directory and output it to the directory specified by the `--output` flag.

```shell
kubebuilder alpha generate-helm-chart --from=<path> --output=<path>
```

> pros: Always generates the Helm Chart from the project, ensuring that the output is synchronized.
> 
> cons: Does not preserve customizations made by the users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main drawback of this option is that it does not adhere to the Kubebuilder ecosystem. Additionally, we would not take advantage of Kubebuilder library features, such as avoiding overwriting the `values.yaml`. It might also be harder to support and maintain since we would not have the templates as we usually do.

Lastly, another con is that it would not allow us to scaffold projects with the plugin enabled and in the future provide further configurations and customizations for this plugin. These configurations would be tracked in the `PROJECT` file, allowing integration with other projects, extensions, and the re-scaffolding of the HelmChart while preserving the inputs provided by the user via plugins flags as it is done for example for the [Deploy Image](https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/deploy-image-plugin-v1-alpha) plugin. 
```

  enabled: true
  ## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/
  service:
    ports:
    - name: webhook-server
      protocol: TCP
      containerPort: 9443

metrics:
  enabled: true
  service:
    type: ClusterIP
    ports:
    - port: 8443
      protocol: TCP

## The domain name of Kubernetes cluster 
## More info: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/
clusterDomain: cluster.local
```

### User Stories

- As a developer, I want to be able to generate a helm chart from a kustomize directory so that I can distribute the helm chart to my users. Also, I want the 
generation to be as simple as possible without the need to write any additional duplicate files.

- As a user, I want the helm chart can cover all potential configurations when I deploy it on the Kubernetes cluster.

- As a platform engineer, I want to be able to manage different versions and configurations of a project across multiple clusters and environments based on the same distribution artifact (Helm Chart), with versioning and dependency locking for supply chain security.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

> TBF

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### Plugin Layout

- **Location and Versioning**: The new plugin should follow Kubebuilder standards and
be implemented under `pkg/plugins/optional`. It should be introduced as an alpha version
(`v1alpha`), similar to the [Grafana plugin](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/tree/master/pkg/plugins/optional/grafana/v1alpha).

- **The data should be tracked in PROJECT File**: Usage of the plugin should be tracked in the `PROJECT`
file with the input via flags and options if required. Example entry in the `PROJECT` file:

```yaml
...
plugins:
  helm-chart.go.kubebuilder.io/v1-alpha:
    options:
      <flag/key>: <value>
```

Ensure that user-provided input is properly tracked, similar to how it's done in
other plugins [(see the code in the plugin.go)](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/c058fb95fe0ccd8d2a3147990251ca501df5eb26/pkg/plugins/golang/deploy-image/v1alpha1/plugin.go#L58-L75)
and the [(code source to track the data)](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/c058fb95fe0ccd8d2a3147990251ca501df5eb26/pkg/plugins/golang/deploy-image/v1alpha1/api.go#L191-L217)
of the deploy-image plugin for reference.

**NOTE** We might not need options/flags in the first implementation. However, we should still track the plugin as 
we do for the Grafana plugin. 

#### Plugin Implementation Structure

Following the structure implementation for the source code of this plugin:

```shell
.
├── helm-chart
│   └── v1alpha1
│       ├── init.go
│       ├── edit.go
│       ├── api.go -> Implement any required change in the scaffolds when we run kubebuilder create api
│       ├── webhook.go -> Implement any required change in the scaffolds when we run kubebuilder create webhook
│       ├── plugin.go
│       └── scaffolds
│           ├── init.go
│           ├── edit.go
│           ├── api.go
│           ├── webhook.go
│           └── internal
│               └── templates
```

**Example**

We might want to have only webhook relate scaffold in the HelmChart when/if
the user run `kubebuilder create webhook`. Therefore, the templates and
logic to change the scaffold in this case would be under this subCommand.

Note that we can inject values and/or overwrite then as we do in other places
using the helpers implemented in Kubebuilder. See for example, that we
only add the NetworkPolices relevant to webhooks when those are created in the
project. For further information check its code implementation [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/c058fb95fe0ccd8d2a3147990251ca501df5eb26/pkg/plugins/common/kustomize/v2/scaffolds/webhook.go#L93-L146)

#### HelmChart Values Scaffolded by the Plugin

- **Allow values.yaml to be fully re-generated with the flag --force**:

By default, the `values.yaml` file should not
be overwritten. However, users should have the option to overwrite it using
a flag (`--force=true`).

This can be implemented in the specific template as done for other plugins:

```go
if f.Force {
    f.IfExistsAction = machinery.OverwriteFile
} else {
    f.IfExistsAction = machinery.Error
}
```

- **Helm Chart Templates should have conditions**:

Ensure templates install resources based on
conditions defined in the `values.yaml`. Example for CRDs:

```
# To install CRDs
{{- if .Values.crd.install }}
...
{{- end }}
```

- **Customizable Values**: Set customizable values in the `values.yaml`,
  such as defining ServiceAccount names, and whether they should be created or not.
  Furthermore, we should include comments to help end-users understand the source
  of configurations. Example:

```yaml
{{- if .Values.rbac.create }}
apiVersion: v1
kind: ServiceAccount
metadata:
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: project-v4
    app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: kustomize
  name: {{ .Values.rbac.serviceAccountName }}
  namespace: {{ .Release.Namespace }}
{{- end }}
```

- **Layout of the Helm-Chart**:

Following an example of the expected result of this plugin:

```shell
example-project/
  dist/
  helm-chart/
    example-project-crd/
      ├── Chart.yaml
      ├── templates/
      │   ├── _helpers.tpl
      │   ├── crds/
      │   │   └── <CRDs YAML files generated under config/crds/>
      └── values.yaml
    example-project/
      ├── Chart.yaml
      ├── templates/
      │   ├── _helpers.tpl
      │   ├── crds/
      │   └── <CRDs YAML files generated under config/crds/>
      │   ├── certmanager/
      │   │   └── certificate.yaml
      │   ├── default/
      │   │   └── metrics_service.yaml
      │   ├── manager/
      │   │   └── manager.yaml
      │   │   └── namespace.yaml      
      │   ├── network-policy/
      │   │   ├── allow-metrics-traffic.yaml
      │   │   └── allow-webhook-traffic.yaml // Should be added by the plugin subCommand webhook.go
      │   ├── prometheus/
      │   │   └── monitor.yaml
      │   ├── rbac/
      │   │   ├── kind_editor_role.yaml
      │   │   ├── kind_viewer_role.yaml
      │   │   ├── leader_election_role.yaml
      │   │   ├── leader_election_role_binding.yaml
      │   │   ├── metrics_auth_role.yaml
      │   │   ├── metrics_auth_role_binding.yaml
      │   │   ├── metrics_reader_role.yaml
      │   │   ├── role.yaml
      │   │   ├── role_binding.yaml
      │   │   └── service_account.yaml
      │   ├── samples/
      │   │   └── kind_version_admiral.yaml
      │   ├── webhook/
      │   │   ├── manifests.yaml
      │   │   └── service.yaml
      └── values.yaml
```

- **Example of values.yaml**:

```yaml
namespace:
  create: true
  name: <projectName>-system

# Install CRDs under the template
crd:
  install: false

# Webhook configuration sourced from the `config/webhook`
webhook:
  enabled: true
  conversion:
    enabled: true

## RBAC configuration under the `config/rbac` directory
rbac:
  create: true
  serviceAccountName: "controller-manager"

# Cert-manager configuration
certmanager:
  enabled: false
  issuerName: "letsencrypt-prod"
  commonName: "example.com"
  dnsName: "example.com"

# Network policy configuration sourced from the `config/network_policy`
networkPolicy:
  enabled: false

# Prometheus configuration
prometheus:
  enabled: false

# Sample configuration sourced from the `config/samples`
samples:
  install: true

# Manager configuration sourced from the `config/manager`
manager:
  replicas: 1
  image:
    repository: "controller"
    tag: "latest"
  resources:
    limits:
      cpu: 100m
      memory: 128Mi
    requests:
      cpu: 100m
      memory: 64Mi

# Metrics configuration sourced from the `config/metrics`
metrics:
  enabled: true

# Leader election configuration sourced from the `config/leader_election`
leaderElection:
  enabled: true
  role: "leader-election-role"
  rolebinding: "leader-election-rolebinding"
  

# Controller Manager configuration sourced from the `config/manager`
controllerManager:
  manager:
    args:
    - --metrics-bind-address=:8443
    - --leader-elect
    - --health-probe-bind-address=:8081
    containerSecurityContext:
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
      capabilities:
        drop:
        - ALL
    image:
      repository: controller
      tag: latest
    resources:
      limits:
        cpu: 500m
        memory: 128Mi
      requests:
        cpu: 10m
        memory: 64Mi
  replicas: 1
  serviceAccount:
    annotations: {}

# Kubernetes cluster domain configuration
kubernetesClusterDomain: cluster.local

# Metrics service configuration sourced from the `config/metrics`
metricsService:
  ports:
  - name: https
    port: 8443
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 8443
  type: ClusterIP

# Webhook service configuration sourced from the `config/webhook`
webhookService:
  ports:
  - port: 443
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 9443
  type: ClusterIP
```

- **Optional configurations should be disabled by default**:

The HelmChart plugin should not scaffold optional options enabled 
when those are scaffolded as disabled by the default implementation 
of `kustomize/v2` and consequently the `go/v4` plugin used by default. Example:

The dependency on Cert-Manager is disabled by default.

```yaml
From config/default/kusyomization.yaml
# [CERTMANAGER] To enable cert-manager, uncomment all sections with 'CERTMANAGER'. 'WEBHOOK' components are required.
#- ../certmanager
```

Therefore, by default the values.ymal should be scaffold with:

```
# Cert-manager configuration
certmanager:
  enabled: false
```

- **Namespace Creation**:

For Golang projects, the namespace will always be created, and the project will be deployed within it. 
For the Helm chart, we should:

```
# templates/manager/namespace.yaml
{{- if .Values.namespace.create }}
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: {{ .Values.namespace.name }}
{{- end }}
```

#### To Sync the changes to the HelmCharts

For all implemementations, we need to check the resources which
are scaffold for each subCommand via the [kustomize](https://kubebuilder.io/plugins/kustomize-v2) plugin
and ensure that we will implement the subCommand of the HelmChart plugin
to the respective scaffolds as well.

##### When kubebuilder create api is executed

We can check in [pkg/plugins/common/kustomize/v2/scaffolds/api.go](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/c058fb95fe0ccd8d2a3147990251ca501df5eb26/pkg/plugins/common/kustomize/v2/scaffolds/api.go#L75-L84) 
the boilerplates called and the scaffolds done. Therefore, the 
`pkg/plugins/optional/helm-chart/v1alpha/scaffolds/api.go` 
will also need to have the relevant code implementation to do the same 
scaffolds under `dist/helm-charts/`.

##### When kubebuilder create webhook is executed

In this case, we should add the webhook section to the `values.yaml`
as `enabled:true` and ensure that HelmChart has the relevant templates
for webhooks.

We will need to use the utils helpers such as [AppendCodeIfNotExist](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/c058fb95fe0ccd8d2a3147990251ca501df5eb26/pkg/plugin/util/util.go#L101C6-L112)
to achieve this goal. Also, we will need to ensure that we do the equivalent
scaffolds as described above for the create api subCommand.

##### To Sync the Manifests Created with `controller-gen`

Users will need to call the subcommand `edit` passing the plugin to 
ensure that the Helm chart is properly synced.

Therefore, the `PostScaffold` of this command should:

- **Run `make manifests`**: Generate the latest CRDs and other manifests.
- **Copy the files to Helm chart templates**:
  - Copy CRDs: `cp config/crd/bases/*.yaml helm-chart/example-project-crd/templates/crds/`
  - Copy RBAC manifests: `cp config/rbac/*.yaml helm-chart/example-project/templates/rbac/`
  - Copy webhook configurations: `cp config/webhook/*.yaml helm-chart/example-project/templates/webhook/`
  - Copy the manager manifest: `cp config/default/manager.yaml helm-chart/example-project/templates/manager/manager.ymal0`
- **Replace placeholders with Helm values**: Ensure that customized fields, such as the namespace, are properly replaced accordingly.
Example: Replace `name: system` with `{{ .Values.namespace.name }}`.

This ensures the Helm chart is always up-to-date with the latest 
manifests generated by Kubebuilder, maintaining consistency with the 
configured namespace and other customizable fields.

We will need to use the utils helpers such as [ReplaceInFile](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/c058fb95fe0ccd8d2a3147990251ca501df5eb26/pkg/plugin/util/util.go#L303-L323)
or [EnsureExistAndReplace](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/c058fb95fe0ccd8d2a3147990251ca501df5eb26/pkg/plugin/util/util.go#L276)
to achieve this goal.
```

This proposal aims to introduce an optional mechanism that allows users to generate a Helm Chart from their Kubebuilder-scaffolded project. This will enable them to effectively package and distribute their solutions.

To achieve this goal, we are proposing a new native Kubebuilder [plugin](https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/plugins) (i.e., helm-chart/v1-alpha) which will provide the necessary scaffolds. The plugin will function similarly to the existing [Grafana Plugin](https://book.kubebuilder.io/plugins/grafana-v1-alpha), generating or regenerating HelmChart files using the init and edit sub-commands (i.e., `kubebuilder init|edit --plugins helm-chart/v1-alpha`). An alternative solution could be to implement an alpha command, similar to the [helper provided to upgrade projects](https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/rescaffold).

## Example

**To enable the helm-chart generation when a project is initialized**

> kubebuilder init --plugins=`go/v4,helm-chart/v1-alpha`

**To enable the helm-chart generation after the project be scaffolded OR to update the helm-chart files**

> kubebuilder edit --plugins=`go/v4,helm-chart/v1-alpha`

> The HelmChart should be scaffold under the `deploy/` directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The HelmChart should be scaffold under the `dist/` directory:
```

```shell
├── PROJECT
...
├── dist
│   └── {{ projectName }}-chart
...
```

> ## Open Questions [optional]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Open Questions
```

### How to manage and scaffold the CRDs for the HelmChart?

According to [Helm Best Practices for Custom Resource Definitions](https://helm.sh/docs/chart_best_practices/custom_resource_definitions/#method-1-let-helm-do-it-for-you), 
there are two main methods for handling CRDs:

- **Method 1:Let Helm Do It For You:**  Place CRDs in the `crds/` directory. Helm installs these CRDs during the initial 
install but does not manage upgrades or deletions.
- **Method 2:Separate Charts:**  Place the CRD definition in one chart 
and the resources using the CRD in another chart. 
This method requires separate installations for each chart.

**Raised Considerations and Concerns**
- **Use Helm crd directory** The upgraded chart versions will silently ignore CRDs even if they differ from the installed versions. This could lead to surprising and unexpected behavior.

> However, it is how [cert-manager][]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it is how [cert-manager][https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/helm/]
```

webhooks and controllers which does not shows to be compatible with Kubebuilder Golang scaffold.

**Proposed Solution**

Follow the same approach adopted by [Cert-Manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/helm/).
Add the CRDs under the `template` directory and have a spec in the `values.yaml`
which will define if the CRDs should or not be applied

```shell
helm install|upgrade \
  myrelease \
  --namespace my-namespace \
  --set `crds.enabled=true`
```

Additionally, we might want to consider in the future also
scaffold separate charts for the APIs and support both.
An example of this approach provided as feedback
was [karpenter-provider-aws](https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/tree/main/charts).

### How to manage dependencies such as Cert-Manager and Prometheus?

Helm charts allow maintainers to define dependencies via `requirements.yaml`.

However, we can convey that in the initial version of this plugin, we do not need to consider any dependencies. 
As it stands today, consumers of the solutions built with Kubebuilder 
are responsible for installing their dependencies prior 

> to installing the project built with Kubebuilder.
> 
> For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to installing the project built with Kubebuilder. For example:
```

Subsequently, if a user decides to scaffold webhooks, we should uncomment the relevant sections. Please refer to PRs https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/pull/3627 and https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/pull/3629 for examples of this implementation.

Lastly, when new API(s) (CRDs) are introduced, they must be added to the Helm Chart as well. As a result, the Makefile targets `make generate` and `make manifest` should be modified when the proposed plugin is in use to ensure that CRDs are accurately copied and pasted into the Helm Chart's respective directory.

To allow users to customize their Helm Charts, we should avoid overwriting files within the Helm Chart, with the exception of CRDs/webhooks, as changes made to these must be mirrored in the Helm Chart. However, what is scaffolded by the init/edit should remain primarily unchanged. We would only uncomment the options as described above.

## Motivation

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

maintainers are looking to also provide their solutions via Helm Chart. Users currently face the challenges of lacking
an officially supported distribution mechanism for Helm Charts. They seek to:

- Harness the power of Helm Chart as a package manager for the project, enabling seamless adaptation to diverse deployment environments.
- Take advantage of Helm's dependency management capabilities to simplify the installation process of project dependencies, such as cert-manager.
- Seamlessly integrate with Helm's ecosystem, including FluxCD, to efficiently manage the project.

Consequently, this proposal aims to introduce a method that allows Kubebuilder users to easily distribute their projects through Helm Charts, a strategy that many well-known projects have adopted:

- [mongodb](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/mongodb-helm-charts/community-operator)
- [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/v1.6-docs/installation/helm/#1-add-the-jetstack-helm-repository)
- [prometheus](https://bitnami.com/stack/prometheus-operator/helm)
- [aws-load-balancer-controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/tree/main/helm/aws-load-balancer-controller)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

generation to be as simple as possible without the need to write any additional duplicate files.

- As a user, I want the helm chart can cover all potential configurations when I deploy it on the Kubernetes cluster.

- As a platform engineer, I want to be able to manage different versions and configurations of a project across multiple clusters and environments based on the same distribution artifact (Helm Chart), with versioning and dependency locking for supply chain security.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

TBF

### Risks and Mitigations

**Difficulty in Maintaining the Solution**

Maintaining the solution may prove challenging in the long term, particularly if it does not gain community adoption and, consequently, collaboration. To mitigate this risk, the proposal aims to introduce an optional alpha plugin or to implement it through an alpha command. This approach provides us with greater flexibility to make adjustments or, if necessary, to deprecate the feature without definitively compromising support.

### Proof of Concept [optional]

Refer to the open source tool
[helmify](https://github.com/arttor/helmify).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Subsequently, if a user decides to scaffold webhooks, we should uncomment the relevant sections. Please refer to PRs https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/pull/3627 and https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/pull/3629 for examples of this implementation.

Lastly, when new API(s) (CRDs) are introduced, they must be added to the Helm Chart as well. As a result, the Makefile targets `make generate` and `make manifest` should be modified when the proposed plugin is in use to ensure that CRDs are accurately copied and pasted into the Helm Chart's respective directory.

To allow users to customize their Helm Charts, we should avoid overwriting files within the Helm Chart, with the exception of CRDs/webhooks, as changes made to these must be mirrored in the Helm Chart. However, what is scaffolded by the init/edit should remain primarily unchanged. We would only uncomment the options as described above.

## Motivation

> ## Motivation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

generation to be as simple as possible without the need to write any additional duplicate files.

- As a user, I want the helm chart can cover all potential configurations when I deploy it on the Kubernetes cluster.

- As a platform engineer, I want to be able to manage different versions and configurations of a project across multiple clusters and environments based on the same distribution artifact (Helm Chart), with versioning and dependency locking for supply chain security.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

TBF

### Risks and Mitigations

**Difficulty in Maintaining the Solution**

Maintaining the solution may prove challenging in the long term, particularly if it does not gain community adoption and, consequently, collaboration. To mitigate this risk, the proposal aims to introduce an optional alpha plugin or to implement it through an alpha command. This approach provides us with greater flexibility to make adjustments or, if necessary, to deprecate the feature without definitively compromising support.

### Proof of Concept [optional]

Refer to the open source tool
[helmify](https://github.com/arttor/helmify).

## Drawbacks

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  webhooks and controllers which does not shows to be compatible with Kubebuilder Golang scaffold.

**Proposed Solution**

Follow the same approach adopted by [Cert-Manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/helm/).
Add the CRDs under the `template` directory and have a spec in the `values.yaml`
which will define if the CRDs should or not be applied

```shell
helm install|upgrade \
  myrelease \
  --namespace my-namespace \
  --set `crds.enabled=true`
```

Also, add another spec to the `values.yaml` to not allow the CRDs
be deleted when the helm is uninstalled:

```yaml
  # START annotations {{- if .Values.crds.keep }}
  annotations:
    helm.sh/resource-policy: keep
  # END annotations {{- end }}
```

By last, to ensure that the CRD will be installed before
the samples under the template we will need to use helm-hooks:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  name: myresources.example.com
  annotations:
    "helm.sh/hook": pre-install, pre-upgrade
    "helm.sh/hook-weight": "0"
```

Additionally, we want to
scaffold separate charts for the APIs and support both.
An example of this approach provided as feedback

> was [karpenter-provider-aws](https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/tree/main/charts).

Reviewer: @joelanford @Jay-Madden @FourFifthsCode ^ see the proposed solution
The idea would have both and let maintainers/consumers of the project decide.

WDYT?

Or do you think we should only do the separate chart for crds since that follow the good practices?

  # END annotations {{- end }}
```

By last, to ensure that the CRD will be installed before
the samples under the template we will need to use helm-hooks:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  name: myresources.example.com
  annotations:
    "helm.sh/hook": pre-install, pre-upgrade
    "helm.sh/hook-weight": "0"
```

Additionally, we want to
scaffold separate charts for the APIs and support both.
An example of this approach provided as feedback
was [karpenter-provider-aws](https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/tree/main/charts).

We should either make clear the usage of both supported
ways and clarify their limitations. However, the proposed
solution would result in the following layout:

```
example-project/
  dist/
  helm-chart/
    example-project-crd/
      ├── Chart.yaml
      ├── templates/
      │   ├── _helpers.tpl
      │   ├── crds/
      │   │   └── <CRDs YAML files generated under config/crds/>
      └── values.yaml
    example-project/
      ├── Chart.yaml
      ├── templates/
      │   ├── _helpers.tpl
      │   ├── crds/
      │   └── <CRDs YAML files generated under config/crds/>
      │   ├── ...

> ```

Reviewer: @joelanford @Jay-Madden @FourFifthsCode ^ see the proposed solution
WDYT?

the same behavior implemented in the subCommands of the kustomize plugin.
For instance, if the flag is used when creating an API, it forces
the overwrite of the generated samples. Similarly, if the api subCommand
of the HelmChart plugin is called with `--force`, we should replace
all samples with the latest versions instead of only adding the new one.

- **Helm Chart Templates should have conditions**:

Ensure templates install resources based on
conditions defined in the `values.yaml`. Example for CRDs:

```
# To install CRDs
{{- if .Values.crd.install }}
...
{{- end }}
```

- **Customizable Values**: Set customizable values in the `values.yaml`,
  such as defining ServiceAccount names, and whether they should be created or not.
  Furthermore, we should include comments to help end-users understand the source
  of configurations. Example:

```yaml
{{- if .Values.rbac.create }}
apiVersion: v1
kind: ServiceAccount
metadata:
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: project-v4
    app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: kustomize
  name: {{ .Values.rbac.serviceAccountName }}
  namespace: {{ .Release.Namespace }}
{{- end }}
```

- **Example of values.yaml**:

```yaml
namespace:
  create: true

>   name: <projectName>-system

Reviewer: We need remove 

> There are a few things that stand out right off the bat, like the notes on namespace substitution. In Helm, a single release can only be in a single namespace. The install and upgradesubcommands work like kubectl regarding namespace: they assume the current namespace, unless -n, --namespace is provided. If a namespace is provided this way, and the namespace doesn't already exist, the install subcommand will fail unless --create-namespace flag is also used. Because of this, neither Helm chart values.yaml or templates contain a namespace key. So that part can be removed from the proposal.

    targetPort: 8443
  type: ClusterIP

# Webhook service configuration sourced from the `config/webhook`
webhookService:
  ports:
  - port: 443
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 9443
  type: ClusterIP
```

### Optional configurations should be disabled by default

The HelmChart plugin should not scaffold optional options enabled
when those are scaffolded as disabled by the default implementation
of `kustomize/v2` and consequently the `go/v4` plugin used by default. Example:

The dependency on Cert-Manager is disabled by default.

```yaml
From config/default/kusyomization.yaml
# [CERTMANAGER] To enable cert-manager, uncomment all sections with 'CERTMANAGER'. 'WEBHOOK' components are required.
#- ../certmanager
```

Therefore, by default the `values.yaml` should be scaffolded with:

```
# Cert-manager configuration
certmanager:
  enabled: false
```

### Namespace Creation

For Golang projects, the namespace will always be created, and the project will be deployed within it.
For the Helm chart, we should:

```
# templates/manager/namespace.yaml
{{- if .Values.namespace.create }}
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: {{ .Values.namespace.name }}
{{- end }}

> ```

Reviewer: Remove :

There are a few things that stand out right off the bat, like the notes on namespace substitution. In Helm, a single release can only be in a single namespace. The install and upgradesubcommands work like kubectl regarding namespace: they assume the current namespace, unless -n, --namespace is provided. If a namespace is provided this way, and the namespace doesn't already exist, the install subcommand will fail unless --create-namespace flag is also used. Because of this, neither Helm chart values.yaml or templates contain a namespace key. So that part can be removed from the proposal.

### Layout of the Helm-Chart

Following an example of the expected result of this plugin:

```shell
example-project/
  dist/
  helm-chart/
    example-project-crd/
      ├── Chart.yaml
      ├── templates/
      │   ├── _helpers.tpl
      │   ├── crds/
      │   │   └── <CRDs YAML files generated under config/crds/>
      └── values.yaml
    example-project/
      ├── Chart.yaml
      ├── templates/
      │   ├── _helpers.tpl
      │   ├── crds/
      │   └── <CRDs YAML files generated under config/crds/>
      │   ├── certmanager/
      │   │   └── certificate.yaml
      │   ├── default/
      │   │   └── metrics_service.yaml
      │   ├── manager/
      │   │   └── manager.yaml

>       │   │   └── namespace.yaml

Reviewer: Rmeove 
```suggestion

```
